README.md, before:

# react ws canvas

[![NPM](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/react-ws-canvas.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-ws-canvas) [![JavaScript Style Guide](https://img.shields.io/badge/code_style-standard-brightgreen.svg)](https://standardjs.com)

Spreadsheet like react canvas datagrid optimized for performance built entirely typescript and react functional components with react hooks.

**LIVE DEMO** ( current [development](https://codesandbox.io/s/github/devel0/react-ws-canvas/tree/master/example) or latest **stable version** [v0.5.4](https://codesandbox.io/s/github/devel0/react-ws-canvas/tree/4029b9f278824215ca2ffdf65cabe6e2ccf32c4c/example) )

---

- [features](#features)
- [quickstart](#quickstart)
- [how to contribute ( quickstart )](#how-to-contribute--quickstart-)
- [local deploy](#local-deploy)
- [how this project was built](#how-this-project-was-built)
- [development notes](#development-notes)

---

## features

- **canvas based** high performance datagrid ( able to scroll with ease millions of rows maintaining immediate cell focus and editing features )

50000 rows x 200 cols example ( [LIVE EXAMPLE](https://codesandbox.io/s/github/devel0/react-ws-canvas/tree/master/example) : click example1 button )

![](doc/50000rows_200cols.gif)

- **direct cell editing**, just click on a cell then type, hit ENTER or arrows keys to move next ( [native cell types][1] )
  - "text": type text to change cell ; CANC to clear cell ; CTRL+C / CTRL+V to copy/paste
  - "boolean": toggle boolean with keyboard space when cell focused
  - "date", "time", "datetime": smart date insertion ( typing 121030 results in 12/10/2030 ) browser locale supported
  - "number": sci numbers ( typing 12e-3 results in 0.012 displayed ) browser locale support for decimal separators

- [properties default values][22]

- [cell or row][2] selection mode

![](doc/selection-mode-cells.png)

![](doc/selection-mode-rows.png)

- selection [mode multi][9]

![](doc/selection-mode-multi.png)

- frozen [rows][3], [cols][4]

![](doc/frozen-rows-cols.png)

- [wrap][21] text cells

![](doc/text-wrap.gif)

- rows and cols numbering can be [shown or hidden][5]

- if column numbering visible automatic sort can be customized through [less-than-op][6]

- [column click behavior][12] can be full column select, column toggle sort or none to disable sort/select behavior

- [column header][15] can be customized

- column width can be changed intractively using mouse

![](doc/column-width-resize.png)

- column width [autoexpand][16]

- column custom [initial sort][18]

![](doc/initial-sort.png)

- data getter/setter can follow a [worksheet][7] or a [db record type][8]

- [api][10] available for control interactions ( [example][11] )

- each individual cell [custom edit][13] ( F2 ) control can be customized

- [cell style][19] customization

![](doc/cell-style-customization.png)

- container [height min][23] and canvas [styles][20]

- each individual [cell type][14] can be customized

- support mobile touch scrolling rows, cols and scrollbars

[1]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasColumn.tsx#L1
[2]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L30
[3]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L24
[4]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L26
[5]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L31-L34
[6]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L48-L49
[7]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/6802447dac4247fcb6cd16cab14338d8c8b9dab7/example/src/Sample2.tsx#L98-L100
[8]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/6802447dac4247fcb6cd16cab14338d8c8b9dab7/example/src/Sample3.tsx#L128-L130
[9]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L27-L28
[10]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasApi.tsx#L7
[11]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/38997638bb5f1f043164fdf73802490cfafa06c3/example/src/App.tsx#L15
[12]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L35-L36
[13]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L44-L45
[14]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L50-L51
[15]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/Sample2.tsx#L87
[16]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/5a7b126b35a08350f1fb3409138c2dfee49360f4/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L23-L24
[17]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/5a7b126b35a08350f1fb3409138c2dfee49360f4/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L68-L69
[18]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/86ffa34c4b17f6f56b106119c7874c910df9c371/example/src/Sample2.tsx#L93-L99
[19]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/eea7a9f653fe827300291b3b5b3e6870d9ff4692/example/src/Sample2.tsx#L100-L109
[20]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/eea7a9f653fe827300291b3b5b3e6870d9ff4692/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L143-L146
[21]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/10556d1e377e8258077f4a87cffb21f722c7e4e6/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L103-L104
[22]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/6802447dac4247fcb6cd16cab14338d8c8b9dab7/example/src/lib/WSCanvasPropsDefault.tsx#L13
[23]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/e756188d46ffe9fc96bc68d66de65aa6af42b146/example/src/Sample3.tsx#L120

## quickstart

![](doc/quickstart.png)

- create react app

```sh
create-react-app test --typescript
cd test
yarn add react-ws-canvas
```

- edit `App.tsx` as follows

```ts
import React, { useState, useEffect } from 'react';
import { WSCanvas, useWindowSize, WSCanvasColumnClickBehavior } from 'react-ws-canvas';

const AppQuickStart: React.FC = () => {
  const [rows, setRows] = useState<any[][]>([]);
  const winSize = useWindowSize();

  const ROWS = 500000;
  const COLS = 20;

  useEffect(() => {

    const _rows = [];
    for (let ri = 0; ri < ROWS; ++ri) {
      const row = [];
      for (let ci = 0; ci < COLS; ++ci) {
        row.push("r:" + ri + " c:" + ci);
      }
      _rows.push(row);
    }

    setRows(_rows);
  }, []);

  return <WSCanvas
    width={winSize.width} height={winSize.height}
    rowsCount={rows.length} colsCount={COLS}
    showColNumber={true} showRowNumber={true}
    columnClickBehavior={WSCanvasColumnClickBehavior.ToggleSort}
    dataSource={rows}
    getCellData={(cell) => rows[cell.row][cell.col]}
    prepareCellDataset={() => rows.slice()}
    commitCellDataset={(q) => setRows(q)}
    setCellData={(q, cell, value) => q[cell.row][cell.col] = value}
  />;
}

export default AppQuickStart;
```

- run the app

```sh
yarn start
```

## tips

- prepare column info using [WSCanvasColumn][1000] ( [example][1001] ) then attach required prop using hint provided from WSCanvasColumn field documentation ( ie. `getColumnHeader={(col) => columns[col].header}` )

- to allow read/write cell set `getCellData`, `prepareCellDataset`, `setCellData`, `commitCellDataset` ( [example][1002] )

- to ensure data sync with view set [dataSource][1003]

- to inhibit column sorting set `columnClickBehavior` to [None][1004]

[1000]: [https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3389cbc6b510b209d78fcc277f7ef80d9b8e0b29/example/src/lib/WSCanvasColumn.tsx#L17]
[1001]: [https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3389cbc6b510b209d78fcc277f7ef80d9b8e0b29/example/src/Sample3.tsx#L21]
[1002]: [https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3389cbc6b510b209d78fcc277f7ef80d9b8e0b29/example/src/Sample3.tsx#L128-L132]
[1003]: [https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3389cbc6b510b209d78fcc277f7ef80d9b8e0b29/example/src/Sample3.tsx#L128]
[1004]: [https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3389cbc6b510b209d78fcc277f7ef80d9b8e0b29/example/src/lib/WSCanvasColumn.tsx#L8]

## how to contribute ( quickstart )

- clone repo

```sh
git clone https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas.git
```

- open vscode

```sh
cd react-ws-canvas
code .
```

- from vscode, open terminal ctrl+\` and execute example application ( this allow you to set **breakpoints** directly on library source code from `lib` folder )

```sh
cd example
yarn install
yarn start
```

- start chrome session using F5

## local deploy

- from library

```sh
cd lib
yarn build && yalc publish
```

- from your project

```sh
npm uninstall react-ws-canvas --save && yalc add react-ws-canvas && npm install
```

## how this project was built

```sh
yarn create react-app react-ws-canvas --typescript
```

Because I need a library to publish and either a working example to test/debug the library project structured this way:

- `/package.json` ( workspaces "example" and "lib" )
- `/example` ( example and library sources )
  - `/example/package.json`
  - `/example/.env` with BROWSER=none to avoid browser start when issue `yarn start` because I use F5 from vscode to open debugging session
  - `/example/lib` ( library source codes )
- `/lib` ( library publishing related files )
  - `/lib/package.json`
  - `/lib/rollup.config.json` ( specifically `input: '../example/src/lib/index.tsx',  ` )
  - `/lib/tsconfig.json` ( specifically `"rootDirs": ["../example/src/lib"],` and `"include": ["../example/src/lib"],` )
  - `/lib/prepatch-and-publish` ( helper script to prepatch version and publish with README.md )

## development notes

- remove any `from "react-ws-canvas";`

Commit message:

fix cellToCanvasCoord to work as viewCellToCanvasCoord; added custom enum example

README.md, after:

# react ws canvas

[![NPM](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/react-ws-canvas.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-ws-canvas) [![JavaScript Style Guide](https://img.shields.io/badge/code_style-standard-brightgreen.svg)](https://standardjs.com)

Spreadsheet like react canvas datagrid optimized for performance built entirely typescript and react functional components with react hooks.

**LIVE DEMO** ( current [development](https://codesandbox.io/s/github/devel0/react-ws-canvas/tree/master/example) or latest **stable version** [v0.5.4](https://codesandbox.io/s/github/devel0/react-ws-canvas/tree/4029b9f278824215ca2ffdf65cabe6e2ccf32c4c/example) )

---

- [features](#features)
- [quickstart](#quickstart)
- [how to contribute ( quickstart )](#how-to-contribute--quickstart-)
- [local deploy](#local-deploy)
- [how this project was built](#how-this-project-was-built)
- [development notes](#development-notes)

---

## features

- **canvas based** high performance datagrid ( able to scroll with ease millions of rows maintaining immediate cell focus and editing features )

50000 rows x 200 cols example ( [LIVE EXAMPLE](https://codesandbox.io/s/github/devel0/react-ws-canvas/tree/master/example) : click example1 button )

![](doc/50000rows_200cols.gif)

- **direct cell editing**, just click on a cell then type, hit ENTER or arrows keys to move next ( [native cell types][1] )
  - "text": type text to change cell ; CANC to clear cell ; CTRL+C / CTRL+V to copy/paste
  - "boolean": toggle boolean with keyboard space when cell focused
  - "date", "time", "datetime": smart date insertion ( typing 121030 results in 12/10/2030 ) browser locale supported
  - "number": sci numbers ( typing 12e-3 results in 0.012 displayed ) browser locale support for decimal separators

- [properties default values][22]

- [cell or row][2] selection mode

![](doc/selection-mode-cells.png)

![](doc/selection-mode-rows.png)

- selection [mode multi][9]

![](doc/selection-mode-multi.png)

- frozen [rows][3], [cols][4]

![](doc/frozen-rows-cols.png)

- [wrap][21] text cells

![](doc/text-wrap.gif)

- rows and cols numbering can be [shown or hidden][5]

- if column numbering visible automatic sort can be customized through [less-than-op][6]

- [column click behavior][12] can be full column select, column toggle sort or none to disable sort/select behavior

- [column header][15] can be customized

- column width can be changed intractively using mouse

![](doc/column-width-resize.png)

- column width [autoexpand][16]

- column custom [initial sort][18]

![](doc/initial-sort.png)

- data getter/setter can follow a [worksheet][7] or a [db record type][8]

- [api][10] available for control interactions ( [example][11] )

- each individual cell [custom edit][13] ( F2 ) control can be customized

- [cell style][19] customization

![](doc/cell-style-customization.png)

- container [height min][23] and canvas [styles][20]

- each individual [cell type][14] can be customized

- support mobile touch scrolling rows, cols and scrollbars

[1]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasColumn.tsx#L1
[2]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L30
[3]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L24
[4]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L26
[5]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L31-L34
[6]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L48-L49
[7]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/6802447dac4247fcb6cd16cab14338d8c8b9dab7/example/src/Sample2.tsx#L98-L100
[8]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/6802447dac4247fcb6cd16cab14338d8c8b9dab7/example/src/Sample3.tsx#L128-L130
[9]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L27-L28
[10]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasApi.tsx#L7
[11]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/38997638bb5f1f043164fdf73802490cfafa06c3/example/src/App.tsx#L15
[12]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L35-L36
[13]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L44-L45
[14]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L50-L51
[15]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3160c5e6548f7543a63d8ae8ef81c896a5bcef9a/example/src/Sample2.tsx#L87
[16]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/5a7b126b35a08350f1fb3409138c2dfee49360f4/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L23-L24
[17]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/5a7b126b35a08350f1fb3409138c2dfee49360f4/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L68-L69
[18]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/86ffa34c4b17f6f56b106119c7874c910df9c371/example/src/Sample2.tsx#L93-L99
[19]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/eea7a9f653fe827300291b3b5b3e6870d9ff4692/example/src/Sample2.tsx#L100-L109
[20]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/eea7a9f653fe827300291b3b5b3e6870d9ff4692/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L143-L146
[21]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/10556d1e377e8258077f4a87cffb21f722c7e4e6/example/src/lib/WSCanvasProps.tsx#L103-L104
[22]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/6802447dac4247fcb6cd16cab14338d8c8b9dab7/example/src/lib/WSCanvasPropsDefault.tsx#L13
[23]: https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/e756188d46ffe9fc96bc68d66de65aa6af42b146/example/src/Sample3.tsx#L120

## quickstart

![](doc/quickstart.png)

- create react app

```sh
create-react-app test --typescript
cd test
yarn add react-ws-canvas
```

- edit `App.tsx` as follows

```ts
import React, { useState, useEffect } from 'react';
import { WSCanvas, useWindowSize, WSCanvasColumnClickBehavior } from 'react-ws-canvas';

const AppQuickStart: React.FC = () => {
  const [rows, setRows] = useState<any[][]>([]);
  const winSize = useWindowSize();

  const ROWS = 500000;
  const COLS = 20;

  useEffect(() => {

    const _rows = [];
    for (let ri = 0; ri < ROWS; ++ri) {
      const row = [];
      for (let ci = 0; ci < COLS; ++ci) {
        row.push("r:" + ri + " c:" + ci);
      }
      _rows.push(row);
    }

    setRows(_rows);
  }, []);

  return <WSCanvas
    width={winSize.width} height={winSize.height}
    rowsCount={rows.length} colsCount={COLS}
    showColNumber={true} showRowNumber={true}
    columnClickBehavior={WSCanvasColumnClickBehavior.ToggleSort}
    dataSource={rows}
    getCellData={(cell) => rows[cell.row][cell.col]}
    prepareCellDataset={() => rows.slice()}
    commitCellDataset={(q) => setRows(q)}
    setCellData={(q, cell, value) => q[cell.row][cell.col] = value}
  />;
}

export default AppQuickStart;
```

- run the app

```sh
yarn start
```

## tips

- prepare column info using [WSCanvasColumn][1000] ( [example][1001] ) then attach required prop using hint provided from WSCanvasColumn field documentation ( ie. `getColumnHeader={(col) => columns[col].header}` )

- to allow read/write cell set `getCellData`, `prepareCellDataset`, `setCellData`, `commitCellDataset` ( [example][1002] )

- to ensure data sync with view set [dataSource][1003]

- to inhibit column sorting set `columnClickBehavior` to [None][1004]

- transform data on-the-fly using `getCellData` ( [example][1005] )

[1000]: [https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3389cbc6b510b209d78fcc277f7ef80d9b8e0b29/example/src/lib/WSCanvasColumn.tsx#L17]
[1001]: [https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3389cbc6b510b209d78fcc277f7ef80d9b8e0b29/example/src/Sample3.tsx#L21]
[1002]: [https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3389cbc6b510b209d78fcc277f7ef80d9b8e0b29/example/src/Sample3.tsx#L128-L132]
[1003]: [https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3389cbc6b510b209d78fcc277f7ef80d9b8e0b29/example/src/Sample3.tsx#L128]
[1004]: [https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/3389cbc6b510b209d78fcc277f7ef80d9b8e0b29/example/src/lib/WSCanvasColumn.tsx#L8]
[1005]: [https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas/blob/71250c44e7dae6dab2b6979ec8747030b7c59148/example/src/Sample3.tsx#L129-L134]

## how to contribute ( quickstart )

- clone repo

```sh
git clone https://github.com/devel0/react-ws-canvas.git
```

- open vscode

```sh
cd react-ws-canvas
code .
```

- from vscode, open terminal ctrl+\` and execute example application ( this allow you to set **breakpoints** directly on library source code from `lib` folder )

```sh
cd example
yarn install
yarn start
```

- start chrome session using F5

## local deploy

- from library

```sh
cd lib
yarn build && yalc publish
```

- from your project

```sh
npm uninstall react-ws-canvas --save && yalc add react-ws-canvas && npm install
```

## how this project was built

```sh
yarn create react-app react-ws-canvas --typescript
```

Because I need a library to publish and either a working example to test/debug the library project structured this way:

- `/package.json` ( workspaces "example" and "lib" )
- `/example` ( example and library sources )
  - `/example/package.json`
  - `/example/.env` with BROWSER=none to avoid browser start when issue `yarn start` because I use F5 from vscode to open debugging session
  - `/example/lib` ( library source codes )
- `/lib` ( library publishing related files )
  - `/lib/package.json`
  - `/lib/rollup.config.json` ( specifically `input: '../example/src/lib/index.tsx',  ` )
  - `/lib/tsconfig.json` ( specifically `"rootDirs": ["../example/src/lib"],` and `"include": ["../example/src/lib"],` )
  - `/lib/prepatch-and-publish` ( helper script to prepatch version and publish with README.md )

## development notes

- remove any `from "react-ws-canvas";`
